docs/serialisation/protobuf.md, before:

## Protobuf serialisation

When protocols use protobuf as a serialisation, alloy also proposes a set of semantics for how smithy shapes translate to protobuf-specific concepts. In this document, we describe these semantics by explaining how the smithy code should translate to proto code representing the equivalent data.

`alloy` defines a number of traits that are aimed at capturing various semantics relative to [https://protobuf.dev/overview/](protobuf) serialisation that are not part of the smithy standard library.

For full documentation on what each of these traits does, see the smithy specification [here](modules/core/resources/META-INF/smithy/proto/proto.smithy).

Note that for convenience, `alloy` provides a module containing protobuf definitions that used downstream to ensure that the semantics described in this document are respected.

```
com.disneystreaming.alloy:alloy-protocol:x.y.z
```

### Validation

`alloy` comes with validators that verify the abidance of shapes to the rules described below. Note that these validators are protocol-specific, and
are only verifying shapes that belong to the transitive closure of shapes annotated with either `alloy.proto#grpc` or `alloy.proto#protoEnabled`.

### Primitives

Below is a table describing how smithy shapes translate to proto constructs.

Protobuf supports a number of [scalar types](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3#scalar) that do not have first class support in smithy. In order to allow for expressing some of these in smithy, `alloy` provides a `alloy.proto#protoNumType` trait that can refine the meaning of `Integer` or `Long` types in protobuf semantics.


| Smithy type          | @protoNumType | Proto                                         |
| -------------------- | ------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| boolean              | N/A           | bool                                          |
| bigDecimal           | N/A           | string                                        |
| bigInteger           | N/A           | string                                        |
| blob                 | N/A           | bytes                                         |
| double               | N/A           | double                                        |
| float                | N/A           | float                                         |
| string               | N/A           | string                                        |
| integer, byte, short | N/A           | int32                                         |
| integer, byte, short | FIXED         | fixed32                                       |
| integer, byte, short | FIXED_SIGNED  | sfixed32                                      |
| integer, byte, short | SIGNED        | sint32                                        |
| integer, byte, short | UNSIGNED      | uint32                                        |
| long                 | N/A           | int64                                         |
| long                 | FIXED         | fixed64                                       |
| long                 | FIXED_SIGNED  | sfixed64                                      |
| long                 | SIGNED        | sint64                                        |
| long                 | UNSIGNED      | uint64                                        |
| timestamp            | N/A           | message { long seconds = 1; long nanos = 2; } |

#### alloy.proto#protoWrapped

Additionally, in the context of `alloy`, the presence of the `@protoWrapped` trait is interpreted as requiring the primitive to be wrapped in a one-field message.

For instance :

```smithy
@protoWrapped
string MyString
```

would be converted to

```proto
message MyString {
  string value = 1;
}
```

When converting .smithy IDL files to .proto IDL, types from the `google.protobuf` library and the `alloy.protobuf` library can be used.
Using `protoWrapped` is interesting as it permits the distinction between the absence of a value and the presence of a default value.

| Smithy type          | @protoNumType |                                 |
| -------------------- | ------------- | ------------------------------- |
| float                | N/A           | google.protobuf.FloatValue      |
| blob                 | N/A           | google.protobuf.BytesValue      |
| boolean              | N/A           | google.protobuf.BoolValue       |
| double               | N/A           | google.protobuf.DoubleValue     |
| bigDecimal           | N/A           | alloy.protobuf.BigDecimalValue  |
| bigInteger           | N/A           | alloy.protobuf.BigIntegerValue  |
| string               | N/A           | google.protobuf.StringValue     |
| integer, byte, short | N/A           | google.protobuf.Int32Value      |
| integer, byte, short | FIXED         | alloy.protobuf.FixedInt32Value  |
| integer, byte, short | FIXED_SIGNED  | alloy.protobuf.SFixedInt32Value |
| integer, byte, short | SIGNED        | alloy.protobuf.SInt32Value      |
| integer, byte, short | UNSIGNED      | google.protobuf.UInt32Value     |
| long                 | N/A           | google.protobuf.SInt64Value     |
| long                 | FIXED         | alloy.protobuf.Fixed64Value     |
| long                 | FIXED_SIGNED  | alloy.protobuf.SFixed64Value    |
| long                 | SIGNED        | alloy.protobuf.SInt64Value      |
| long                 | UNSIGNED      | google.protobuf.UInt64Value     |

#### alloy.proto#protoNumType

Integer and Long shapes can be annotated with the `@alloy.proto#protoNumType` in order to signal what encoding should be used during protobuf serialisation.

- SIGNED
- UNSIGNED
- FIXED
- FIXED_SIGNED

See [here](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/proto3/#scalar) for documentation about these encodings.


#### UUIDs

By default, string shapes annotated with `@uuidFormat` are serialised as protobuf strings. However, a `alloy.proto#protoCompactUUID` trait is provided, which signals that the serialised form should be a message containing two int64 values :

Smithy:

```smithy
use alloy#uuidFormat
use alloy.proto#protoCompactUUID

@protoCompactUUID
@uuidFormat
string MyUUID

structure Foo {
  uuid : alloy#UUID
}
```

Proto:

```proto
message MyUUID {
  int64 upper_bits = 1;
  int64 lower_bits = 2;
}

message Foo {
  uuid: MyUUID
}
```

### Documents

Documents should be serialised using a protobuf message equivalent to the one below :

```proto
message DNull {
}

message DArray {
  repeated Document values = 1;
}

message DObject {
  map<string, Document> values = 1;
}

message Document {
  oneof value {
    DNull dNull = 1;
    bool dBoolean = 2;
    double dNumber = 3;
    string dString = 4;
    DArray dArray = 5;
    DObject dObject = 6;
  }
}
```

For convenience, alloy provides this proto definition in a jar publised to maven-central `alloy-protobuf`

### Aggregate Types

Structure, unions and (string) enumerations follow the rule that unless specified otherwise, the "proto indexes" (or "field numbers") assigned
to their members should be monotonically increase. The first member receives the index `1` in the case of structures and unions, whilst it receives the index `0` in the case of enumerations.

#### Structures

Smithy:
```smithy
structure Testing {
  myString: String,
  myInt: Integer
}
```

Proto:
```proto
import "google/protobuf/wrappers.proto";

message Testing {
  google.protobuf.StringValue myString = 1;
  google.protobuf.Int32Value myInt = 2;
}
```

#### Unions

Unions in Smithy are tricky to translate to Protobuf because of the nature of `oneOf` : unions are first-class citizens in Smithy, whereas `oneOf` can only exist relatively to messages in proto. Therefore, the default encoding for unions in protobuf is equivalent to the one of a proto `message` that contains a `definition` field which is the `oneOf`. For example:

Smithy:
```smithy
structure Union {
  @required
  value: TestUnion
}

union TestUnion {
    num: Integer,
    txt: String
}
```

Proto:
```proto
message Union {
  foo.TestUnion value = 1;
}

message TestUnion {
  oneof definition {
    int32 num = 1;
    string txt = 2;
  }
}
```

It is possible to use the `alloy@protoInlinedOneOf` to indicate that a union should be encoded as if the corresponding `oneOf` was directly inlined in a message. This is subject to additional constraints, are `oneOf` field indices are supposed to flattened into the containing `message`'s' field indices. However, this encoding is more compact.

For example:

Smithy:
```smithy

use alloy.proto#protoInlinedOneOf

structure Union {
  value: TestUnion
}

@protoInlinedOneOf
union TestUnion {
    num: Integer,
    txt: String
}
```

Proto:
```proto
syntax = "proto3";

package foo;

message Union {
  oneof value {
    int32 num = 1;
    string txt = 2;
  }
}
```

##### Union members targeting collections

Protobuf doesn't allow `oneof` members to have `repeated` or `map` fields. As a result, a smithy union with a members targeting a collection shapes MUST
either have the `@protoWrapped` trait or target a collection shape have the `@protoWrapped` trait.

##### Inlined unions (`alloy.proto#protoInlinedOneOf`)

The `alloy.proto#protoInlinedOneOf` trait can be used to inline the corresponding `oneof` in a protobuf message. A union with this trait MUST be used referenced exactly once, by a structure member.

For example, this is valid:

```smithy
structure Test {
  myUnion: MyUnion
}

@protoInlinedOneOf
union MyUnion {
  a: String,
  b: Integer
}
```

But this is not because the `MyUnion` is used in multiple shapes.

```smithy
structure Test {
  myUnion: MyUnion
}
structure OtherStruct {
  aUnion: MyUnion
}

@protoInlinedOneOf
union MyUnion {
  a: String,
  b: Integer
}
```

This is also invalid because `MyUnion` is never used.

```smithy
@protoInlinedOneOf
union MyUnion {
  a: String,
  b: Integer
}
```

##### List

Smithy:
```smithy
list StringList {
    member: String
}
structure Struct {
    value: StringList
}
```

Proto:
```proto
message Struct {
  repeated string value = 1;
}
```

##### Map

Smithy:
```smithy
map StringStringMapType {
    key: String,
    value: String
}
structure StringStringMap {
  value: StringStringMapType
}
```

Proto:
```proto
message StringStringMap {
  map<string, string> value = 1;
}
```

##### String Enumerations (closed)

Smithy:
```smithy
enum Color {
    RED
    GREEN
    BLUE
}
```

Proto:
```proto
enum Color {
  RED = 0;
  GREEN = 1;
  BLUE = 2;
}
```

##### String Enumerations (open)

Open string enumerations are considered as raw strings when serialised to protobuf :

Smithy:
```smithy
@alloy#openEnum
enum Color {
    RED
    GREEN
    BLUE
}

structure Foo {
    color: Color
}
```

Proto:
```proto
message Foo {
  String color = 1;
}
```

##### Integer Enumerations (closed)

Each value translates to the proto index. Because of this, one of the values MUST be 0, as proto enforces each enumeration to have a value set to 0.

Smithy:
```smithy
intEnum Color {
    RED = 0
    GREEN = 5
    BLUE = 6
}
```

Proto:
```proto
enum Color {
  RED = 0;
  GREEN = 5;
  BLUE = 6;
}
```

##### Integer Enumerations (open)

Open int enumerations are considered as raw integers when serialised to protobuf :

Smithy:
```smithy
@alloy#openEnum
enum Color {
    RED = 6
    GREEN = 7
    BLUE = 8
}

structure Foo {
    color: Color
}
```

Proto:
```proto
message Foo {
  int32 color = 1;
}
```

#### alloy.proto#protoIndex

The `alloy.proto#protoIndex` trait marks an explicit index to be used for a member when it gets serialised to protobuf. For example:

the following

```smithy
structure Test {
  @protoIndex(2)
  str: String
}
```

has the following meaning in proto semantics

```proto
message Test {
  string str = 2;
}
```

When one member is annotated with a `@protoIndex`, all members have to be annotated with it. This includes the members of :

* structures
* unions
* (closed) enumerations

##### protoIndex for enumerations

Members of closed enumerations (whether string or int) can be annotated by `alloy.proto#protoIndex` in smithy to customise the corresponding proto index that should be used during serialisation. An additional constraint is that when users elect to specify `alloy.proto#protoIndex`, they are required to assign the `0` value to one of the enumeration members, as it is a requirement on the protobuf side.

On the other hand, members of open enumerations MUST NOT be annotated with `alloy.proto#protoIndex`, as open enumerations in Smithy translate to the raw string/int in protobuf, allowing for the capture of unknown value regardless of how the target language generates enumerations.

### Additional protobuf-related traits

#### alloy.proto#protoEnabled

This trait can be used by tooling to filter-in the list of shapes that should be taken into consideration when performing some protobuf-related validation or processing. This is used, for example, by the [smithy-translate](https://github.com/disneystreaming/smithy-translate/) tool.

#### alloy.proto#protoReservedFields

This can be used by tooling to mark some fields as reserved, which can be helpful to prevent some backward/forward compatibility problems when using smithy to describe protobuf/gRPC interactions.

It allows to mark certain field indexes as unusable by the smithy specification. For example, if a range is provided of 1 to 10 then the proto indexes
for any fields in that structure must fall outside of that range. Ranges are inclusive.

Commit message:

Rework the wording related to implicit protobuf fields

docs/serialisation/protobuf.md, after:

## Protobuf serialisation

When protocols use protobuf as a serialisation, alloy also proposes a set of semantics for how smithy shapes translate to protobuf-specific concepts. In this document, we describe these semantics by explaining how the smithy code should translate to proto code representing the equivalent data.

`alloy` defines a number of traits that are aimed at capturing various semantics relative to [https://protobuf.dev/overview/](protobuf) serialisation that are not part of the smithy standard library.

For full documentation on what each of these traits does, see the smithy specification [here](modules/core/resources/META-INF/smithy/proto/proto.smithy).

Note that for convenience, `alloy` provides a module containing protobuf definitions that used downstream to ensure that the semantics described in this document are respected.

```
com.disneystreaming.alloy:alloy-protocol:x.y.z
```

### Validation

`alloy` comes with validators that verify the abidance of shapes to the rules described below. Note that these validators are protocol-specific, and
are only verifying shapes that belong to the transitive closure of shapes annotated with either `alloy.proto#grpc` or `alloy.proto#protoEnabled`.

### Primitives

Below is a table describing how smithy shapes translate to proto constructs.

Protobuf supports a number of [scalar types](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3#scalar) that do not have first class support in smithy. In order to allow for expressing some of these in smithy, `alloy` provides a `alloy.proto#protoNumType` trait that can refine the meaning of `Integer` or `Long` types in protobuf semantics.


| Smithy type          | @protoNumType | Proto                                         |
| -------------------- | ------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| boolean              | N/A           | bool                                          |
| bigDecimal           | N/A           | string                                        |
| bigInteger           | N/A           | string                                        |
| blob                 | N/A           | bytes                                         |
| double               | N/A           | double                                        |
| float                | N/A           | float                                         |
| string               | N/A           | string                                        |
| integer, byte, short | N/A           | int32                                         |
| integer, byte, short | FIXED         | fixed32                                       |
| integer, byte, short | FIXED_SIGNED  | sfixed32                                      |
| integer, byte, short | SIGNED        | sint32                                        |
| integer, byte, short | UNSIGNED      | uint32                                        |
| long                 | N/A           | int64                                         |
| long                 | FIXED         | fixed64                                       |
| long                 | FIXED_SIGNED  | sfixed64                                      |
| long                 | SIGNED        | sint64                                        |
| long                 | UNSIGNED      | uint64                                        |
| timestamp            | N/A           | message { long seconds = 1; long nanos = 2; } |

#### alloy.proto#protoWrapped

Additionally, in the context of `alloy`, the presence of the `@protoWrapped` trait is interpreted as requiring the primitive to be wrapped in a one-field message.

For instance :

```smithy
@protoWrapped
string MyString
```

would be converted to

```proto
message MyString {
  string value = 1;
}
```

When converting .smithy IDL files to .proto IDL, types from the `google.protobuf` library and the `alloy.protobuf` library can be used.
Using `protoWrapped` is interesting as it permits the distinction between the absence of a value and the presence of a default value.

| Smithy type          | @protoNumType |                                 |
| -------------------- | ------------- | ------------------------------- |
| float                | N/A           | google.protobuf.FloatValue      |
| blob                 | N/A           | google.protobuf.BytesValue      |
| boolean              | N/A           | google.protobuf.BoolValue       |
| double               | N/A           | google.protobuf.DoubleValue     |
| bigDecimal           | N/A           | alloy.protobuf.BigDecimalValue  |
| bigInteger           | N/A           | alloy.protobuf.BigIntegerValue  |
| string               | N/A           | google.protobuf.StringValue     |
| integer, byte, short | N/A           | google.protobuf.Int32Value      |
| integer, byte, short | FIXED         | alloy.protobuf.FixedInt32Value  |
| integer, byte, short | FIXED_SIGNED  | alloy.protobuf.SFixedInt32Value |
| integer, byte, short | SIGNED        | alloy.protobuf.SInt32Value      |
| integer, byte, short | UNSIGNED      | google.protobuf.UInt32Value     |
| long                 | N/A           | google.protobuf.SInt64Value     |
| long                 | FIXED         | alloy.protobuf.Fixed64Value     |
| long                 | FIXED_SIGNED  | alloy.protobuf.SFixed64Value    |
| long                 | SIGNED        | alloy.protobuf.SInt64Value      |
| long                 | UNSIGNED      | google.protobuf.UInt64Value     |

#### alloy.proto#protoNumType

Integer and Long shapes can be annotated with the `@alloy.proto#protoNumType` in order to signal what encoding should be used during protobuf serialisation.

- SIGNED
- UNSIGNED
- FIXED
- FIXED_SIGNED

See [here](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/proto3/#scalar) for documentation about these encodings.


#### UUIDs

By default, string shapes annotated with `@uuidFormat` are serialised as protobuf strings. However, a `alloy.proto#protoCompactUUID` trait is provided, which signals that the serialised form should be a message containing two int64 values :

Smithy:

```smithy
use alloy#uuidFormat
use alloy.proto#protoCompactUUID

@protoCompactUUID
@uuidFormat
string MyUUID

structure Foo {
  uuid : alloy#UUID
}
```

Proto:

```proto
message MyUUID {
  int64 upper_bits = 1;
  int64 lower_bits = 2;
}

message Foo {
  uuid: MyUUID
}
```

### Documents

Documents should be serialised using a protobuf message equivalent to the one below :

```proto
message DNull {
}

message DArray {
  repeated Document values = 1;
}

message DObject {
  map<string, Document> values = 1;
}

message Document {
  oneof value {
    DNull dNull = 1;
    bool dBoolean = 2;
    double dNumber = 3;
    string dString = 4;
    DArray dArray = 5;
    DObject dObject = 6;
  }
}
```

For convenience, alloy provides this proto definition in a jar publised to maven-central `alloy-protobuf`

### Aggregate Types

In the absence of explicit `@protoIndex` traits on their members, the following rules is applied for structures/unions/string enumerations:

* In the case of structure and union members, the members should be treated as having an implicit protobuf field value starting from 1 for the first member, and increasing monotonically (by 1) for each subsequent member.
* In the case of string enumerations, the members should be treated as having an implicit protobuf field value string from 0 for the first member, and increasing monotonically (by 1) for each subsequent member.

#### Structures

Smithy:
```smithy
structure Testing {
  myString: String,
  myInt: Integer
}
```

Proto:
```proto
import "google/protobuf/wrappers.proto";

message Testing {
  google.protobuf.StringValue myString = 1;
  google.protobuf.Int32Value myInt = 2;
}
```

#### Unions

Unions in Smithy are tricky to translate to Protobuf because of the nature of `oneOf` : unions are first-class citizens in Smithy, whereas `oneOf` can only exist relatively to messages in proto. Therefore, the default encoding for unions in protobuf is equivalent to the one of a proto `message` that contains a `definition` field which is the `oneOf`. For example:

Smithy:
```smithy
structure Union {
  @required
  value: TestUnion
}

union TestUnion {
    num: Integer,
    txt: String
}
```

Proto:
```proto
message Union {
  foo.TestUnion value = 1;
}

message TestUnion {
  oneof definition {
    int32 num = 1;
    string txt = 2;
  }
}
```

It is possible to use the `alloy@protoInlinedOneOf` to indicate that a union should be encoded as if the corresponding `oneOf` was directly inlined in a message. This is subject to additional constraints, are `oneOf` field indices are supposed to flattened into the containing `message`'s' field indices. However, this encoding is more compact.

For example:

Smithy:
```smithy

use alloy.proto#protoInlinedOneOf

structure Union {
  value: TestUnion
}

@protoInlinedOneOf
union TestUnion {
    num: Integer,
    txt: String
}
```

Proto:
```proto
syntax = "proto3";

package foo;

message Union {
  oneof value {
    int32 num = 1;
    string txt = 2;
  }
}
```

##### Union members targeting collections

Protobuf doesn't allow `oneof` members to have `repeated` or `map` fields. As a result, a smithy union with a members targeting a collection shapes MUST
either have the `@protoWrapped` trait or target a collection shape have the `@protoWrapped` trait.

##### Inlined unions (`alloy.proto#protoInlinedOneOf`)

The `alloy.proto#protoInlinedOneOf` trait can be used to inline the corresponding `oneof` in a protobuf message. A union with this trait MUST be used referenced exactly once, by a structure member.

For example, this is valid:

```smithy
structure Test {
  myUnion: MyUnion
}

@protoInlinedOneOf
union MyUnion {
  a: String,
  b: Integer
}
```

But this is not because the `MyUnion` is used in multiple shapes.

```smithy
structure Test {
  myUnion: MyUnion
}
structure OtherStruct {
  aUnion: MyUnion
}

@protoInlinedOneOf
union MyUnion {
  a: String,
  b: Integer
}
```

This is also invalid because `MyUnion` is never used.

```smithy
@protoInlinedOneOf
union MyUnion {
  a: String,
  b: Integer
}
```

##### List

Smithy:
```smithy
list StringList {
    member: String
}
structure Struct {
    value: StringList
}
```

Proto:
```proto
message Struct {
  repeated string value = 1;
}
```

##### Map

Smithy:
```smithy
map StringStringMapType {
    key: String,
    value: String
}
structure StringStringMap {
  value: StringStringMapType
}
```

Proto:
```proto
message StringStringMap {
  map<string, string> value = 1;
}
```

##### String Enumerations (closed)

Smithy:
```smithy
enum Color {
    RED
    GREEN
    BLUE
}
```

Proto:
```proto
enum Color {
  RED = 0;
  GREEN = 1;
  BLUE = 2;
}
```

##### String Enumerations (open)

Open string enumerations are considered as raw strings when serialised to protobuf :

Smithy:
```smithy
@alloy#openEnum
enum Color {
    RED
    GREEN
    BLUE
}

structure Foo {
    color: Color
}
```

Proto:
```proto
message Foo {
  String color = 1;
}
```

##### Integer Enumerations (closed)

Each value translates to the proto index. Because of this, one of the values MUST be 0, as proto enforces each enumeration to have a value set to 0.

Smithy:
```smithy
intEnum Color {
    RED = 0
    GREEN = 5
    BLUE = 6
}
```

Proto:
```proto
enum Color {
  RED = 0;
  GREEN = 5;
  BLUE = 6;
}
```

##### Integer Enumerations (open)

Open int enumerations are considered as raw integers when serialised to protobuf :

Smithy:
```smithy
@alloy#openEnum
enum Color {
    RED = 6
    GREEN = 7
    BLUE = 8
}

structure Foo {
    color: Color
}
```

Proto:
```proto
message Foo {
  int32 color = 1;
}
```

#### alloy.proto#protoIndex

The `alloy.proto#protoIndex` trait marks an explicit index to be used for a member when it gets serialised to protobuf. For example:

the following

```smithy
structure Test {
  @protoIndex(2)
  str: String
}
```

has the following meaning in proto semantics

```proto
message Test {
  string str = 2;
}
```

When one member is annotated with a `@protoIndex`, all members have to be annotated with it. This includes the members of :

* structures
* unions
* (closed) enumerations

##### protoIndex for enumerations

Members of closed enumerations (whether string or int) can be annotated by `alloy.proto#protoIndex` in smithy to customise the corresponding proto index that should be used during serialisation. An additional constraint is that when users elect to specify `alloy.proto#protoIndex`, they are required to assign the `0` value to one of the enumeration members, as it is a requirement on the protobuf side.

On the other hand, members of open enumerations MUST NOT be annotated with `alloy.proto#protoIndex`, as open enumerations in Smithy translate to the raw string/int in protobuf, allowing for the capture of unknown value regardless of how the target language generates enumerations.

### Additional protobuf-related traits

#### alloy.proto#protoEnabled

This trait can be used by tooling to filter-in the list of shapes that should be taken into consideration when performing some protobuf-related validation or processing. This is used, for example, by the [smithy-translate](https://github.com/disneystreaming/smithy-translate/) tool.

#### alloy.proto#protoReservedFields

This can be used by tooling to mark some fields as reserved, which can be helpful to prevent some backward/forward compatibility problems when using smithy to describe protobuf/gRPC interactions.

It allows to mark certain field indexes as unusable by the smithy specification. For example, if a range is provided of 1 to 10 then the proto indexes
for any fields in that structure must fall outside of that range. Ranges are inclusive.
